Propose ADR for using `TryAdd` in .NET dependency injection (#606)
bitwarden/contributing-docs: docs/architecture/adr/0026-dotnet-dependency-injection-enhancements.md

---
adr: "0026"
status: "Proposed"
date: 2025-05-30
tags: [server]
---

# 0026 - Adopt `TryAdd` Dependency Injection Overloads

<AdrTable frontMatter={frontMatter}></AdrTable>

## Context and Problem Statement

> `Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection` (the DI provider we use) has last one wins behavior. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection` (the DI provider we use) has a "last one wins" behavior -- this
```

> means that if you inject two services of the same service type the last implementation that was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
means that if you inject two services of the same service type, the last implementation that was
```

registered wins. For example:

```csharp
services.AddSingleton<IMyService, ImplementationOne>();
// Somewhere later on in the codebase
services.AddSingleton<IMyService, ImplementationTwo>();
```

> when a service or controller inject `IMyService` they will be getting `ImplementationTwo` even

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a service or controller injects `IMyService` they will be getting `ImplementationTwo` even
```

though `ImplementationOne` _does_ still exist in the service container. It exists in the container
still because if you were to instead inject `IEnumerable<IMyService>` you would receive an
enumerable containing 2 services, one for each implementation that was registered. This **is** the
behavior you want sometimes but it is much rarer to inject an enumerable of services as opposed to

> injecting just a single service. This is where the [`TryAdd`][try-add-definitions] overloads on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
injecting just a single service, and is where the [`TryAdd`][try-add-definitions] overloads on
```

`IServiceCollection` (in the `Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.Extensions` namespace) come

> in handy. They allow you to more explicitly declare the expected usage of a service during service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in handy. One can more explicitly declare the expected usage of a service during service
```
There's a lot of "this is" and "they" running each sentence structure so I am trying to break that up with this.

> configuration time. Take the above example, it could instead be written like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration time. The above example could instead be written like:
```

```csharp
services.TryAddSingleton<IMyService, ImplementationOne>();
// Somewhere later on in the codebase
services.TryAddSingleton<IMyService, ImplementationTwo>();
```

> Now when you inject `IMyService` you would instead be receiving `ImplementaionOne` and if you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now when you inject `IMyService` you would instead be receiving `ImplementationOne` and if you
```

injected `IEnumerable<IMyService>` you would only get an enumerable with a single instance and it
would also be `ImplementationOne`. There would also only be a single `ServiceDescriptor` registered
in the container. What `TryAdd?Keyed?{Singleton|Scoped|Transient}` does under the hood is checks if
there has already been a service with type `IMyService` (and key if using a keyed service)

> registered. If one has, it will skip adding another entry with its given implementation. But if one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
registered. If one has, it will skip adding another entry with its given implementation, but if one
```

has not already been added, it will add it.

If you do want multiple services for a given service type (for using with `IEnumerable<IMyService>`)

> then you should likely be using the `TryAddEnumerable` overload. So if you specially wanted multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then you should likely be using the `TryAddEnumerable` overload. If you specifically wanted multiple
```

> implementation to be able to be injected you'd structure it like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementations to be able to be injected you'd structure it like:
```

```csharp
services.TryAddEnumerable(ServiceDescriptor.Singleton<IMyService, ImplementationOne>());
services.TryAddEnumerable(ServiceDescriptor.Singleton<IMyService, ImplementationTwo>());
```

`TryAddEnumerable` won't add the service to the container if the service type **and** implementation
type are the same. This leads you to one of the three scenarios where you would specifically **not**
want to use the `TryAdd` overloads.

> ## Scenario 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Scenario One
```

If you did want to use inject an `IEnumerable<IMyService>` **and** wanted that list to have multiple
services of the same implementation.

> ## Scenario 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Scenario Two
```

to do so that you don't get a runtime error about a missing dependency. This is a practice followed
throughout the [ASP.NET Core repo][aspnetcore-repo] as well as many other libraries that integrate
with DI. For example, data protection calls [`services.AddOptions`][add-options-example] even though
it's highly likely that something else in the application has already called it and their usage
doesn't actually add any service. This pattern generally makes testing this method easier, as it is
a batteries included method and it also helps show a clear dependency graph. There are a few
services that are allowed to not be explicitly added as they are expected to always be included in
the host. Those services are `ILogger<>`, `ILoggerFactory`, `IConfiguration`, and
`IHostEnvironment`.

## Considered Options

- **Ad-hoc usage** - Where we are today, the `TryAdd` overloads are allowed to be used and are used
  occasionally throughout the codebase but they is no outside encouragement to use them.
- **Encourage usage** - Start encouraging usage through team training and encouragement to use them
  in code reviews but don't make any automatic check to enforce usage.

> - **Enforce usage** - Start enforcing usage of `TryAdd` overloads by adding the

Reviewer: Correct, and we can bring this up during general review.
